One, two, three, four.
You came back from work, would it be, did y'all call it out in the field if you were assigned statewide?
Oh, I think you just called it in the county, working in the county, at the county level.
You'd been working at the county level and you got back to here to the state level.
Right.
I came in in 1955 after having served about three or four years.
Well, part of that I was in graduate school.
three or four years as an agent at the county level.
And I was brought in specifically, I think we mentioned that before, maybe overlap, to try to develop this formula for seeing how many agents each county should have and how much each county should contribute and this type of thing.
And that's because I had my master's research at Michigan State
delved into this area but hadn't, you know, just developed it from Michigan and they wanted it applied and the Michigan only did what we called measured workload but not financing.
But in Texas they wanted both to measure workload and this was in the heyday of the Gilmer Aiken days of some way of having a more rational way of sharing the cost with the counties where
the so-called poor counties would not be expected to contribute quite as much as the, quote, richer counties.
In that era, what were then called the home demonstration agents and the county agents.
Typically your staff was, I guess the average staff in Texas was about three.
It has maintained that pretty much, but that varies
You have a lot of them that have just one, and usually it's an agricultural agent.
If you have a second one, it'll be what they call home demonstration, then later home economics, and they call them family resource.
Now they've changed the name several times.
That usually is the second person.
Third person would probably be an agricultural person, called assistant in those days, who would primarily work with the youth.
If a fourth person came in, it'd probably be a female home economics.
The staffs I worked on in Wharton,
And in Matagorda County, we're that way.
They had four white agents, if I may use that term.
And there were two black agents, but we had separate offices.
And the two younger agents, assistant agents, primarily carried on the youth program.
But they were usually housed together.
I mean, the men were housed together and the women were all housed together.
And that was the typical, but then some of your larger counties might have had additional assistant agents like Harris County, the largest county might have three or four additional assistants.
Were there Hispanic agents carefully selected down near the Rio Grande Valley?
There were a few, but very few.
Oh, really?
Yeah, very few.
I guess primarily there were a few that had met the educational requirements because you had to have a, to work at the county level, you had to have a bachelor's degree in either agriculture or home economics.
Back in the 50s, what would be your guesstimate of the percentage of those county agents that had gotten their undergraduate degree at A&M?
Well, you know, one time I was challenged when I was director in the legislature by a West Texas legislator who said we only hired Aggies.
And I guess there were certainly a predominance of Aggies hired in agriculture, but we didn't produce many home economics agencies.
And I was able to tell him, I mean, he said, you don't hire anybody from tech.
or from this area, and I was able to indicate in that something like 30, I had anticipated the question.
And then the women made the difference because a lot of them came from tech and the home economics program.
We had about 30 or 40 percent of our tech were about
Thirty percent I think came out of Tech where about maybe 55 or 60 percent came out of A&M and then we also drew quite heavily on Oklahoma, particularly in both agriculture and home economics.
I guess the pay situation, they, Oklahoma State had good programs but not enough jobs and a lot of them started working in Texas.
Any from the old state teachers colleges in Texas?
In the home economics field, very few, well, very few of the teachers' colleges had much of an agricultural program.
What about A&R?
A few, South Tech.
I'm sure there were some.
I mean, there were sprinklings of Texas Tech and agriculture.
A&I and Sam Houston, they were, in fact, the agent I worked with in Wharton County was a Sam Houston graduate, had done his undergraduate work there.
All right.
When you got here in 55?
55.
Describe the administrative structure for the Agricultural Extension Service.
Well, as we talked about, the extension service has been switched back and forth to system level, to university level, but at that time I think was considered part of the system
And I guess we'd created a chancellor position by then.
I don't know for sure.
But there was a director and how many in the hierarchy?
You mean in the Extension Service?
Yeah.
About how many were there at the administrative level?
Administrative level there was a director, an associate director, and one or two assistant directors and state leaders.
Administrative staff probably consisted of seven or eight people.
And they were housed where?
Originally in the Trigon.
That was the extension building.
In 55.
Were they still there?
They just, I think they had just, when I started work in 49, they were housed there.
But I think somewhere in between there, they got housed where they are now in the Williams Building.
What we then called the System Administration Building.
Yeah, in the north side on the first floor and they're still, administrative staff is still there.
When you got here in 55, where was your?
In the Administration Building, but they had a hard time finding space for me.
I just kind of, they found a corner for me.
And the director then was who?
The rector was Gibson, or G.G.
Gibson.
Describe him and his manner and style of leadership.
Well, he was a highly respected individual.
He was, did not have a doctorate degree.
He was originally a Texan, I guess had done his undergraduate work at Texas A&M in the field of daring and then got a master's degree from Iowa State and then came back here as a dairy specialist.
G.G.
Gibson?
Gibson.
G.I.B.
From Trinity, Texas.
or G.I.P.?
G.I.B.
or G.I.P.
He just recently passed away at 90-something years old.
Describe him in personality.
Well, he was an easygoing person.
I mean, again, at the county level, you had very little interaction because the state's pretty big.
You mostly interacted with your district supervisor.
But, you know, he was well respected throughout the field.
And, of course, I felt privileged that he selected me to come in as young as I was to work on this special project.
Did he give you any guidance or advice as you began work with him?
Well, very, not directly.
I reported directly to the associate director.
I actually had the title of just, I think at that time they didn't have an available title.
I was promised the title of administrative assistant.
but they had a fellow in that position who was about to retire and they didn't want to, you know, do that, and positions were limited.
So they gave me the title, I think, County Agricultural Agent at Large with the understanding, and I don't know exactly when this happened, but I did get the title of administrative assistant, but I primarily reported to the associate director, who was J.D.
Pruitt, whose wife still lives.
P-R-U-I-T-T.
P-R-E-W-E-T, I guess.
Pruitt.
P-R-U-E or E-W?
P-R-E-W-I-T.
I think that's it.
Don't hold me on this.
I'd have to... P-R-E-W-I-T-T.
He was actually older than Mr. Gibson.
And I guess I always like to deal in anecdotes.
I had met Mr. Gibson when I was first in... Actually, when I started the Extension Service, there was another director.
The graduates do...
He became head of the graduate school, the dean of the graduate school, golly.
Oh, George Quincy?
No, no, no, no, no.
He was an agronomist.
I can't think of his name right now.
He was actually director.
He was a longtime head of the graduate program.
Not Wayne Hall?
Before Quincy.
Not Wayne Hall.
Oh, no, no.
It was before that.
That's before my memory.
No.
In fact, this guy had a Missouri background.
Why can't I think of his name right now?
The senior moment, I guess.
Anyway, he was actually director, and the name will come to me before we leave.
And Gibson had taken over just that time, and after I'd been employed,
I met Gibson just once, you know, at some function or something.
And I went to work in the county, but I told, before we started recording, I told you I used to go to Port Crockett a lot in my military training.
And I had some rowdy former colleagues here at A&M, one of them who was in the med school down there, and we always got together.
He showed me around the Mexican.
They lived rather wildly, as you may know.
Anyway, I was staying at a hotel or something.
I remember this was years, two or three years later, and we came back from our activities about 2 a.m.
in the morning, and there was
Director Gibson on the elevator with me.
And I said, well, you know, I don't really want him to know who I am.
He doesn't remember me.
I, uh, coming in at two o'clock in the morning.
And so I just, you know, stood there without any particular grinning.
He said, how are you, Von Steele?
Of course, somebody told me later I could have asked him what he was doing at that time.
One of the memories.
All right, now in that first assignment of yours, how long did, here, about how long did that take?
Well, it was with the understanding, I guess I came in in 55, and I guess they had identified me as, you know, a possible candidate for future administrative assignments.
I was to work on this particular project, do other special things, you know, wrote a few speeches and things like that, but I primarily worked on this assignment.
Anything you do in Texas that involves counties is a big job because you have to do it in many counties.
And we had just calculators, a lot of number crunching, statistical analysis.
I had enough statistics to worry that, but everything had to be done on a hand calculator.
Of course, I had a secretary that helped a lot on that.
And with the understanding that I would do further graduate work when the opportunity presented himself, and about that time,
Kellogg Foundation funded this program at the University of Wisconsin, the National Agricultural Extension Center for Advanced Study.
I applied for a scholarship and was given this in 57.
So I'd only been here less than two years when I went off to graduate school in 57.
To finish your PhD?
To do my PhD and finished it in 59 and came back in and I was appointed assistant director at that time, mostly for special projects.
I really didn't have much
many people that I supervised.
I was mostly working in special projects.
I continued on this particular project and then was, even for a while, served for six months as acting, even at that age, acting director of the International Programs Office, which was working on a D.W.
Williams office who was vice chancellor for agriculture on the second floor with the chancellor's office.
And they were
between people.
And so I, that's when we had a big Pakistan or, well, it was East Pakistan then.
It's now Bangladesh contract, one I think in Tunisia.
So I got involved in that.
Then I also got involved in this, Kellogg also had funded this National Agriculture Communication Project.
I think I mentioned that before.
where three of us were sent off to the University of Wyoming to get three weeks training with the indication when we came back we trained everybody else.
We would train the trainer type of thing.
At that time, you know, we thought they had a lot of radical new insights into communication and, you know, all of that type of thing.
And so we went around the state, a team of us, two guys and a lady, that trained every single staff member on a district to district basis in that.
Then I also always had my own project in mind that they let me loose on.
It was to develop, and to this day, I still feel it's one of the contributions I made, is to develop a uniform filing system for the, all the reference materials that agents have to keep in their office so you could find things from one county to another.
You know, there were some overall similarities in that.
And after I did that, I also had to train everybody in that system.
And another person and I trained every agent and secretary in the state on the implementation of this system and how to do it.
And then just gradually I got
Additional administrative assignments, let's see, that was in the early 60s.
Trying to relate this, you probably remember when Rudder came here.
It was sometime in the 60s, wasn't it?
Oh, he came in late 1958.
That's, yeah, okay.
Without the official title as president.
Yeah, I remember that.
But apparently everyone... Yeah, recognized him.
I was just trying to relate my own career to that.
I guess it was, when was it in the 60s?
I was always available to do special projects.
It was about the time we undertook the Century Study.
When was that?
In 60?
Or 62.
Yeah.
After doing some of these things, I was, I think we had to spend 20% of our time, because I was one of the
recorders or something for one of the four groups, and we had to, you know, beat with them, make all the arrangements.
Sometimes these groups met separately, as you recall, in different places.
And I worked under you, I guess, at that time.
Back when you got back with your Ph.D.
in 59, Dr. Williams was, D.W.
Williams was then the director of the Extension Service?
No, no, no, no.
Hutchison was by then.
John Hutchison.
Gibson left in, I think in 55, shortly after I came here.
So he's replaced by?
Hutchison.
All right.
Hutchison served 19 years until... Describe John Hutchison as... Well, John Hutchison was one of the most dedicated Extension people, I guess, I ever knew in my life.
I mean, he was totally and thoroughly committed to Extension and was an extremely hard worker and
had a set of principles that was very strong and that influenced me a great deal.
I guess he was the person that I worked with the most, helped the most.
In fact, you'll find this even amusing.
He struggled for years to get his PhD from the University of Chicago
But he made a mistake, which I didn't make.
I wasn't going to make it.
I was going to have my degree before I came back, because I knew once you get back, you get so involved.
And in my experience in writing, it always takes about a half an hour or an hour to get going, to get into it.
And once you get into it, you know, time really doesn't matter.
You turn it out.
But if you try to do it on weekends and an hour here and an hour there, it's very difficult.
So I said I would not come back until I had it.
But John got all his coursework done.
He got his thesis pretty well going.
He lacked the one language requirement.
And you know who tutored him in Spanish?
I did.
And he did finally finish it.
I think about 20 years later, he finally got his degree, but I don't know exactly when, but it took, I think it was 15, they didn't have a time limit there.
I had a time, but University of Chicago at that time didn't have a time limit, but it took him 20, 25 years, I think, before he got that final requirement off.
As the director, what was his normal routine?
About when did he get to the office and when did he leave?
Well, he and, I always, I guess I had as a model, he and Mr. Pruitt was still associate director, and he did the day-to-day work.
He's got an alter ego, which I always felt was a good model of any type of organization.
You have a Mr. Outside and a Mr. Inside.
Somebody's got to, you know, make their decisions on a day-to-day basis.
That was Mr. Pruitt.
He was older, mature, and everybody trusted him, had total confidence in him, and he pretty well rhymed the shop, and John
I mean, I'm not saying that John wasn't firmly in control, but John spent a lot of time out in the state doing the legislative thing, all of that.
Cut that up.
I'm going to... We're talking about work habits of my... Let's see, and we want to say on this machine that the name of the graduate...
administrator we couldn't remember a while ago.
Who was director when I was first appointed was I. P. Trotter.
And that's I-D-E, that's his first name.
P. Trotter.
T-R-O-T-T-E-R.
Yeah, and later he became dean of the, I think that was the title, dean of the graduate school or studies or something.
I think so.
All right, we were talking about John Hutchison.
Well, okay, as I said,
John Hutchison and J.D.
Pruitt were a good team.
They worked together very well.
Mr. Pruitt
I guess for years and years everybody had expected him someday to become director, but he never got an advanced degree, and I guess we're getting into the time where that became more significant because, well, Gibson didn't have one, but of course, well, Hutchison didn't have one when he became director, but he had, you know, worked on it.
He had gone to the University of Chicago before he became, just before he became director, but anyway,
J.D.
Pruitt had been passed over two or three times.
A lot of people had assumed that he should have been elevated or was a logical prospect.
But anyway, I don't think it ever affected him.
He just kept working away.
He had work habits where he always was at the office at 7 o'clock in the morning.
And I found out later that's a good thing to do because you can get everything done between 7 and 8 because from there on you're constantly interrupted in administration with telephone calls and, you know, whatever you plan to do for the day might, you know, one call from a congressman or the president's office or something may, you know, change everything.
But he had the habit of coming at 7 and getting his work done, which caused one of the secretaries to confide in our supervisor of the stenographic staff.
She was so sorry that Mr. Pruitt had a bad home life that he had to leave home so early in the morning to get away from it.
But anyway, John always came in a little after eight because he didn't want to fight the traffic.
You know, we even had traffic in those days.
He'd come in a little bit later.
But they had connecting offices, bathroom in between.
It's still there that way.
And they worked very well together.
And John was very popular.
He had been a horticultural specialist, was very popular and effective as a specialist.
And as I said, gung-ho extension.
I mean, as gung-ho as you can get.
I guess I got some of that into me about becoming a fierce partisan for extension because we really believed in it, and still do, about the good it could do.
I'd seen the good it had done for my family growing up in the Depression, and we really believed that our mission was to help the people out in those rural areas improve the quality of their lives, not just income, but the quality of their lives, particularly I think we
Extension made a big contribution to improving the quality of lives, particularly of farm women, in terms of, you know, trying to get them to use more conveniences and better ways of doing things and so forth.
In general, were most of the professional employees of the Extension service in your decades, in general were most of them products of an agricultural background?
Oh, very definitely.
In fact, one of the requirements
at least in the agricultural area, didn't require it in the home economics, that you grew up on a farm or ranch.
That was one of the questions.
On the, on the, on the, on the, well, at that time, what, 80, 70 percent were still, and, you know, they felt you had to grow up in a rural, a farm area to be able to empathize with them.
Do you remember anybody ever asking for an exception?
Well, that started coming up later on.
I mean, gradually, there were some people, you know, that,
had gotten, you know, small rural towns, they might have not grown up on a farm or ranch, but they were very rural or they, you know, had connections and so forth.
But I think, I think it took some years before that got eliminated from the, from the, but there was a definite question on the application, were you born and raised on a farm or ranch?
Give some examples of the Hutchinson era in legislative work.
How did he relate?
Well, he was extremely successful, and that was in the John Connolly days.
Of course, all of higher education, anything associated with higher education,
And the Extension Service grew tremendously under his leadership.
He was one of the early people who helped develop the Research and Extension, Area Research and Extension Center concept, where we began to staff them.
One of the problems we had, as you can appreciate, contrasting Missouri and Texas, it's very hard to serve the whole state out of College Station with specialists who are expected to go out.
And, you know, meet with agents and meet with farmers.
In fact, specialists will be sent from here to Amarillo if necessary if there's a real problem, you know.
And it's real hard to, you know, people send.
And our specialists in those days, including people like Hutchison, probably spent three weeks out of each month on the road.
I mean, you'd leave Monday morning and sometimes not get back till Saturdays or that type of thing.
But anyway, that was, John was extremely successful in relating to what I call clientele groups, commodity groups, you know, the cotton growers, the Farm Bureau and other, and he garnered their support in getting additional positions at what we call at the area level, area specialist.
He had a concept that was accepted in principle by the
both the appropriations and agriculture committees that for each center, like at Amarillo, Lubbock, Dallas, and so forth, we would have at least one specialist for each major.
You know, if cotton was big at Lubbock, we'd have a cotton man, we'd have an irrigation man because that was, and each of these staff, we had a staffing pattern indicated that
You know, each one would have about 10 or 15, maybe some as many as 20 as specialists.
So we didn't add a lot of specialists here.
We did some in some of the newer developing fields like animal waste controlling on new things coming out.
But most of the staffing was what we'd call at the area level.
And that made county agents work a lot more effective because the county agent had to be a generalist.
I mean, you dealt, even though you may have been trained in animal science, you had to handle agronomic problems, horticulture, everything.
And to have the specialist closer by who was an expert in that area
who might not be more than a few hours could, you know, help you, was very helpful.
Other than John Connolly, at the state political level, who else was supportive during... Briscoe was very supportive.
Briscoe was extremely supportive.
In fact, you know, he wanted the Uvalde Center.
Logically, it should have been located in San Antonio, but...
for some reason it got located to Ubalde because he wanted it there.
And that's been one of our better places for it.
Were there any politicians during that time that were obstructionists or difficult to work with for extension?
Well, we always had the tech A&M problem to deal with.
I mean, there was, I guess, greater competition in those days because they had an agriculture program, a good program, and they wanted to
be the Texas A&M of the High Plains.
I mean, they thought, you know, they should have more of the research and extension dollars directly from there.
But, of course, the extension services weren't set up that way.
They were set up with the land-grant universities.
But because of their geographical influence, and so the politicians were tech first, you know, people, and agriculture second, I guess you'd say.
So you had to deal with that, and there were some really crusty ones.
There was a former speaker from the Rolling Plains area
I can't think of his name now, but I mean, he was really tough on us as it always related to, he's the one that asked me the question, I'm not a tech graduate, and I flabbergasted him by quoting the figure and he wouldn't believe it, but see, I was able to quote the women, which made a significant percentage of total, of the total.
There weren't that many men, but anyway, but no, there were some very difficult battles, but John was very,
very successful, John Hutchison was very successful in selling the concept of extension and the important role that scientific information would help in improving the lot of agriculture.
When you all went to Austin for a hearing or a review, budget, so forth, who was the primary speaker for the extension service?
John Hutchison.
I always accompanied.
I got, I was,
got into the realm pretty I did all of the preparation of materials that including leaflets and you know bar charts and all of the stuff that you use and and making the hearings and well I even started that under Gibson I was taken along on those things but I was often in the background of preparing all the material and it as a separate state agency we had to
spent a lot of time in Austin because we had to not only present our needs to the respective well later on we even had to go through the Higher Education Commission and make early on as you know make a pitch there because we had to have their support and then we had
You know, the House, Senate had a committee that looked in agriculture.
We first met with the substantive committees in both the House.
And that was not just one time.
I mean, sometimes we went to Austin, you know, like several times a month, spending two or three days.
And then, of course, later on, the Appropriations Committees and the Senate Finance Committee and all of that.
And it took a lot of preparation.
And so I was heavily involved in all of that and saw how effective John was
in dealing with the legislature, and he was.
What kind of information did you find was most effective with the legislature?
Well, we tried to, you know, in dealing with the legislature, which was becoming more urbanized, of course we recognized that, we tried to begin to develop more programs that had
you know, some urban implications, particularly in the horticultural areas, landscaping and things like that.
And, of course, in home economics, there really are no rural urban, at least, you know, in those days, it's beginning to break down.
And, you know, trying to demonstrate that we served the thing, all people.
And one of the things that, you know, John always was,
trying to think of ideas, he came up with various campaigns like make Texas number one in agriculture.
I mean, I don't even remember that.
You know, we were second or third to Iowa and California.
California's always one, of course.
Iowa, I think, we're close to Iowa, but I think we're third or we're third.
Anyway, he put out a big campaign, you know, all of this will help make Texas number one in agriculture and agriculture will benefit, you know, the entire economy and that's the kind of approach we do.
Do you remember any specific examples of where a key decision was made in Austin, which in hindsight was very, very important?
Oh, I don't know that I... Like something that there was a swing of a vote or a decision?
In those days, I guess we had governors.
We had mentioned Connelly, who had big agricultural interests, Briscoe, Smith, even though Smith was from West Texas.
You know, they were all very supportive of agriculture and saw extension
as a contributor to agricultural progress.
Before y'all went to Austin for any kind of legislative review, what kind of oversight did Mr. Rutter give to whatever the presentation might be?
Well, once the, within the, within the university or the system, university or system, whatever the case might be,
Once the decision was made to what the budget request would be, everyone supported it.
We supported the experiment station.
They supported ours and everything.
And Mr. Rudder, who participated,
and other presidents in these presentations would usually just give a general background of importance of agriculture and so forth, and then the various agency heads would make their own pitch.
How did you all feel about Mr. Rudder's relationship with the Extension Service?
Supportive, I think, just generally.
Supportive.
I mean, as true as you probably know, Extension exists in a lot of land-grant universities and a lot of land-grant presidents have other things to be worried about.
And Extension pretty well is often left alone or it's... But he, perhaps more than any other president in recent times, he had a better experience with the realities of agriculture.
You know, as I happened to have a meeting yesterday with the chancellor, and the first time I'd ever met him personally, and, you know, I told him what I had heard in some of the national committees I served in, which included both land-grant and non-land-grant universities present.
I may have told you this before, that one land-grant, non-land-grant president told me that
He said he was talking about land-grant presidents who would come up outside the land-grant system.